Doc/v3 migration guide (#2102)
zarr-developers/zarr-python: docs/migration.rst

Zarr-Python 3 Migration Guide
=============================

Zarr-Python 3 introduces a number of changes to the API, including a number
of significant breaking changes and pending deprecations.

This page provides a guide highlighting the most notable changes to help you

> migrate your code from Zarr-Python 2.x to Zarr-Python 3.x.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
migrate your code from version 2 to version 3.
```

Compatibility target
--------------------

Zarr-Python 3 represents a major refactor of the Zarr-Python codebase. Some of the goals motivating this refactor included:

>   - adding support for the V3 specification (alongside the V3 specification)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - adding support for the Zarr V3 specification (alongside the Zarr V2 specification)
```

  - cleaning up internal and user facing APIs
  - improving performance (particularly in high latency storage environments like cloud object store)

> Though these goals necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the major version update), we have tried to maintain

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These goals necessitated some breaking changes to the API (hence the major version update), but we have tried to maintain
```

backwards compatibility in the most widely used parts of the API including the `Array` and `Group` classes and the top-level

> API (e.g. `zarr.open_array` and `zarr.open_group`). It is worth noting that we significantly evolved the internal data model,
> moving away from a model that was tightly coupled to the v2 specification, and to a more generic representation of Zarr objects.

Reviewer: This sentence raises more questions (why did we evolve the data model? how did we evolve the data model? what does the new model look like?), and I don't think is needed for a simple compatability guide, so I think best to drop?
```suggestion
API (e.g. `zarr.open_array` and `zarr.open_group`).
```

Getting ready for 3.0
---------------------

Ahead of the 3.0 release, we suggest projects that depend on Zarr-Python take the following actions:

1. Pin the supported Zarr-Python version to ``zarr>=2,<3``. This is a best practice and will protect your users from any incompatibilities that may arise during the release of Zarr-Python 3.0.

> 2. Limit your imports from the Zarr-Python package. Most of the primary API ``zarr.*`` will be compatible in 3.0. However, the following breaking API changes are planned:

Reviewer: Shouldn't this list have

3. Test that your package works with v3
4. Update the pin to zarr >=3

At the end?

>    - ``numcodecs.*`` will no longer be available in ``zarr.*``. (Suggested action: transition to importing codecs from ``numcodecs`` directly.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - ``zarr.numcodecs.*`` will no longer be available. These imports can be replaced by importing ``numcodecs`` directly.
```
We should be doing more than "suggesting", we should be providing concrete fixes/code updates!

Author: I wish it were that easy! Unfortunately, the top level namespace is littered with `*` imports

https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/blob/e1d98cdf3d35e4cb2815912d82a64c1623347c87/zarr/__init__.py#L2
https://github.com/zarr-developers/zarr-python/blob/e1d98cdf3d35e4cb2815912d82a64c1623347c87/zarr/codecs.py#L2

If there is a reasonable way for us to deprecate folks using these imports, I'm all ears.

Reviewer: Even if there isn't a reasonable way to deprecate the imports, as a minimum this migration guide should provide a complete list of all imports that are disappearing and how to replace them.

>    - The ``zarr.v3_api_available`` feature flag is being removed. (Suggested action: this experimental feature was deprecated in v2.18.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The ``zarr.v3_api_available`` feature flag is being removed. In zarr-python v3 the v3 API is always available, so you shouldn't need to use this flag.
```

>    - The following internal modules are being removed or significant changed:

Author: ```suggestion
   - The following internal modules are being removed or significantly changed. If your application relies on imports from any of the below modules, you will need to either a) modify your application to no longer rely on these imports or b) vendor the parts of the specific modules that you need.
```

   
    - ``zarr.attrs``
    - ``zarr.codecs``
    - ``zarr.context``
    - ``zarr.core``
    - ``zarr.hierarchy``
    - ``zarr.indexing``
    - ``zarr.meta``
    - ``zarr.meta_v1``
    - ``zarr.storage``
    - ``zarr.sync``
    - ``zarr.types``
    - ``zarr.util``

>     - ``zarr.n5``

Reviewer: This needs a clear list of how to update code to adapt to these removals or changes.

> 

Author: ```suggestion

3. Test that your package works with v3. You can start testing against version 3 now (pre-releases are being published to PyPI weekly).
4. Update the pin to zarr >=3
```

Continue using Zarr-Python 2
----------------------------

Zarr-Python 2.x is still available, though we recommend migrating to Zarr-Python 3 for its improvements and new features.
Security and bug fixes will be made to the 2.x series for at least 6 months following the first Zarr-Python 3 release.

If you need to use the latest Zarr-Python 2 release, you can install it with:

>     $ pip install "zarr==2.*"

Reviewer: I don't think this needs a whole section - perhaps just mention zarr-python 2 is available for at least 6 months above somewhere?

Author: I see what you are saying but this has come up a lot. In this case, I'd like to be clear, even if it is obvious.

   
   - ``numcodecs.*`` will no longer be available in ``zarr.*``. (Suggested action: transition to importing codecs from ``numcodecs`` directly.)
   - The ``zarr.v3_api_available`` feature flag is being removed. In zarr-python v3 the v3 API is always available, so you shouldn't need to use this flag.
   - The following internal modules are being removed or significantly changed. If your application relies on imports from any of the below modules, you will need to either a) modify your application to no longer rely on these imports or b) vendor the parts of the specific modules that you need.
   
    - ``zarr.attrs``
    - ``zarr.codecs``
    - ``zarr.context``
    - ``zarr.core``
    - ``zarr.hierarchy``
    - ``zarr.indexing``
    - ``zarr.meta``
    - ``zarr.meta_v1``
    - ``zarr.storage``
    - ``zarr.sync``
    - ``zarr.types``
    - ``zarr.util``
    - ``zarr.n5``

3. Test that your package works with v3. You can start testing against version 3 now (pre-releases are being published to PyPI weekly).
4. Update the pin to zarr >=3

> Continue using Zarr-Python 2

Author: ```suggestion

Continue using Zarr-Python 2
```
